Presentation notes

slide 1 - 3

Welcome/Introduction by way of alternate titles
-literary/film title

slide 4
-Initial Motivation for research, observation


#statfjord demonstration
-this is the initial motivation for this research project was 
observation that oil production has fallen by about 50% since 2000
-Worth noting that this is in a period of strongly rising oil prices
-So initially I just wanted to get a good descriptive understanding about the dynamics of this decline. 
-but it has involved, so I have some alternative titles: 

slide 5
-Naive modeling of oil field data
	- Naive in the sense that I'm new to petroleum research and I don't know what I am doing
	- More importantly, I wanted to be able to model oil field production in a way where I didn't necessarily 
	need to know the all the dirty details of geology, oil field engineering, and technology
	- which leads me to another potential title, with, what I think might be the catchiest of them all...

slide 6
- Oil field production is heavily determined by natural and technological limitations.  Pressure in oil fields drops quickly and even with modern injection techniques this dominates the production profile.
-If I am going to say anything useful about oil production, I need to be able to model and control for this general production profile.  A natural tool to use is then what is called a generalized linear model - basically I try to get establish a general production shape and then see how additional variables interact or shift this shape.  
-and of course, since I work at a business school, the factor that is most important to me would price...

slide 7
-I am still at an early stage of this research and I am still playing around with the modelling.  A lot of what I have done so far is just playing - getting a feel for the data and industry. 
-But one take away that seems to emerge so far is that price has at best a modest affect on production in existing wells.  
-To be more specific, there seems to be no concurrent affect on production, and a small lagged affect (4-6 years) in large fields but not in small.  

So that is where I am going, but Ill start by just giving some descriptives of oil production.  

slide 8
Here is a map of the different oil fields - the estimated total recoverable oil from the fields as well as when they were discovered are shown. 
- one thing to take a way is that most of the large oil fields were found close to the beginning of oil production history in Norway.  
-A notable exception was the relatively recent find of Johan Sverdrup field which is estimated to have something like 300 mill SM3, although I should note I added this field manually - otherwise the fields here are all producing fields and Johan Sverdrup will likely not come on line for another few years.  

slide 9
For a while there was a lot of optimism that when the Norwegian sea was opened for exploration, it would lead to a big renewing of oil production.  But finds have been modest.  
-This might be a warning about the current optimism for exploration in the arctic.  

slide 10 
Here again is a graph of total production, but here I wanted to present a counterfactual:  
If no new fields came on line, what would production look like.  
-What you see is that there is a relatively slow start, but that from the mid 1980 to mid 90s new finds make up a big part of total oil production where existing finds stay flat.  Compare to the last 15 years or so which means that a lof of the production is coming from "old" fields

slide 11

While production has gone down, real investments have increased strongly along with oil prices.  

slide 12

This chart is trying to a lot at the same time, but one thing you can see is that a lot of the investments have gone into older, larger oil fields, not necessarily newer finds.  Again Sverdrup may turn out to be an exception in this trend.  

Also shows the oil price the first year of production of thes wells, you dont necessarily see much of a connection

slide 13

It might make more sense to look at investment per unit of production, and here we see in real terms that this was highest the early days, 

slide 14
though perhaps it makes sense to look at investment and lagged production since there generally is a several year lag between all investments and the actual result production

Here we see that investment seems to have fallen initially but now has strongly picked up, and here we do seem to see some relationship with the oil price.  But it is hard to read too much into this - in a period of lowered production, more investment is needed to get oil out in any case - so it is hard to say anything for sure.  

slide 15
Now that we have a general overview of some of the trends we start with some of the modeling
-To show the importance of correctly accounting for a general shape of the field production profile I'll first run a normal GLM model with parametric, linear predictors - try out a cubic function to account for the general production profile of the fields.  The point is to see what the effect of higher oil prices are.  


slide 16
Dirty box plot - with simulated uncertainty of the coefficients. (admittedly, I was playing a bit here)
If you were going to read the results literally it would mean that a 10 dollar increase in prices would decrease production by about 5-10 percent the same year.  But remember, by chance the peak of production was in the year 2000, a time of low prices.  So we are picking up this spurrious correlation because we are not properly controlling for oil field production profile.  

slide 17

So instead of using a parametric model, I want to use a more general non-parametric or semi-parametric model, so I instead work with the Generalized Additive Model frameworks.

As a very simple illustration, take the production profile of Statfjord

slide 18
I want to fit this basic model - a smooth curve that fits the profile over time.

slide 19
This is the result.  In principal to get this smooth function I could use one of any number of smoothers - kernel smoother, LOESS, etc.  In practice, the most common form of smoother that is used is what is called a spline. 

-basically break the function into chunks and then fit a linear model - a cubic model for example - over those chunks of data and then you tie all those chunks together - the points of which you call knots.  In addition you add a penalty term for the wiggiliness of that function so you can control the level of smoothness.  

slide 20
Just for fun, here is a smoothed function of the Ekofisk production

slide 21
But of course, taking smoothed function of the fields individually gives a good fit, but is not particularily informative.  Instead I want to estimate a general shape of production for the full sample of fields, so what you end up with is a multilevel model like this.  

This is benchmark model - provides fairly good fit, and could potentially be used for forecasting, but is not particularily informative

I split the production time into two smooth functions that in turn interact with the size of the field (by way of total recoverable oil).  The idea is that different fields have different shapes based on their total size

I had to cheat a little bit, because what I found was that you could substantially improve the fit of the model by splitting, somewhat arbitrarily, into larger and smaller fields and estimating the coefficients seperately.  

slide 22
visual of the fit with the benchmark and split benchmark. 


slide 23
Of course, while the benchmark gave good fit, it was not particularily informative.  Especially the inclusion of the function of year which will absorb much of the variation caused by time-varying factors like oil price.

So I make a trade-off, reduce the fit of the model, but try to get some information out of the model and I create a semi-parametric model with parametric, linear effects of price (as a first go),

Compared to the benchmark it does surprisingly well, but in way I should compare it directly to an identical model just without the price term and see if price contributes something to the fit.  
-not clear by inspection whether price improves fit, but some numerical indicators - deviance and estimated degrees of freedom indicate that it does improve the fit, if only modestly.  

slide 24
More importantly, can we get some coefficients






